CHAPTER XVI Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness
She wanted Mr. Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her.
How could you begin? said she.
I can comprehend your going uncharmingly when you had once made a beginning, but what could set you off in the first place?
I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words which laid the foundation.
It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I knew that I had begun.
My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners, my behaviour to you was at least always bordering on the uncivil,
and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not.
Now be sincere. Did you admire me for my impertinence?
For the liveliness of your mind, I did.
You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less.
The fact is that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention.
You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking and looking and thinking for your approbation alone.
I roused and interested you, because I was so unlike them.
Had you not been really amiable, you would have hated me for it.
But in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just,
and in your heart you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted you.
There I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it, and really all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable.
To be sure, you knew no actual good of me, but nobody thinks of that when they fall in love.
Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while she was ill at Netherfield?
Dearest Jane, who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it by all means.
My good qualities are under your protection, and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible,
and in return it belongs to me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may be.
And I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the point at last?
What made you so shy of me when you first called, and afterwards dined here?
Why, especially when you called, did you look as if you did not care about me?
Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement. But I was embarrassed, and so was I.
You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner. A man who had felt less might.
How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it.
But I wonder how long you would have gone on if you had been left to yourself.
I wonder when you would have spoken if I had not asked you.
My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect.
Too much I am afraid. For what becomes of the moral if our comfort springs from a breach of promise?
For I ought not to have mentioned this subject. This will never do.
You need not distrust yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair.
Lady Catherine's unjustifiable endeavors to separate us were the means of removing all my doubts.
I am not indebted from my present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude.
I was not in humor to wait for any opening of yours.
My aunt's intelligence had given me hope, and I was determined at once to know everything.
Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy, for she loves to be of use.
But tell me, what did you come down to Netherfield for?
Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed, or had you intended any more serious consequence?
My real purpose was to see you, and to judge, if I could, whether I might ever hope to make you love me.
My avowed one, or what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial to Bingley,
and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.
Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to befall her?
I am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth, but it ought to be done,
and if he will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done directly.
And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and admire the evenness of your writing,
as another young lady once did, but I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.
From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy had been overrated,
Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner's long letter.
But now, having that to communicate which she knew would be most welcome,
she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness,
and immediately wrote as follows.
I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done,
for your long, kind, satisfactory detail of particulars,
but to say the truth I was too cross to write.
You supposed more than really existed.
But now, suppose as much as you choose.
Give a loose rein to your fancy.
Indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford.
And unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly err.
You must write again very soon and praise him a great deal more than you did in your last.
I thank you again and again for not going to the lakes.
How could I be so silly as to wish it?
Your idea of the ponies is delightful.
We will go round the park every day.
I am the happiest creature in the world.
Perhaps other people have said so before, but not one with such justice.
I'm happier even than Jane.
She only smiles. I laugh.
Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that he can spare from me.
You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.
Yours, etc.
Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style,
and still different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins in reply to his last.
Dear Sir, I must trouble you once more for congratulations.
Elizabeth will soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy.
Console Lady Catherine as well as you can.
But if I were you, I would stand by the nephew.
He has more to give.
Yours sincerely, etc.
Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother on his approaching marriage were all that was affectionate and insincere.
She wrote even to Jane on the occasion to express her delight and repeat all her former professions of regard.
Jane was not deceived, but she was affected, and though feeling no reliance on her,
could not help writing her a much kinder answer than she knew she deserved.
The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information was as sincere as her brother's in sending it.
Four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all her delight and her earnest desire of being loved by her sister.
Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations to Elizabeth from his wife,
the Longbourn family heard that the Collinses were coming themselves to Lucas Lodge.
The reason of this sudden removal was soon evident.
Lady Catherine had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew's letter
that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over.
At such a moment the arrival of her friend was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth,
though in the course of their meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought
when she saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her husband.
He bore it, however, with admirable calmness.
He could even listen to Sir William Lucas when he complimented him on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country,
and expressed his hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James's with very decent composure.
If he did shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.
Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on his forbearance,
and though Mrs. Phillips, as well as her sister, stood in too much awe of him to speak with a familiarity
which Bingley's good humour encouraged, yet whenever she did speak she must be vulgar.
Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all likely to make her more elegant.
Elizabeth did all she could to shield him from the frequent notice of either,
and was ever anxious to keep him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification,
and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure,
it added to the hope of the future.
And she looked forward with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either,
to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at Pemberley.
Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters.
With what delighted pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may be guessed.
I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire
and the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an effect
as to make her a sensible, amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life,
though perhaps it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form,
that she still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly.
Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly.
His affection for her drew him oftener from home than anything else could do.
He delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.
Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelve month.
So near a vicinity to her mother and Maryton relations was not desirable even to his easy temper or her affectionate heart.
The darling wish of his sisters was then gratified.
He bought an estate in a neighboring county to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth,
in addition to every other source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.
Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with her two elder sisters.
In society so superior to what she had generally known, her improvement was great.
She was not of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia, and removed from the influence of Lydia's example,
she became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid.
From the further disadvantage of Lydia's society she was of course carefully kept,
and though Mrs. Wickham frequently invited her to come and stay with her,
with the promise of balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.
Mary was the only daughter who remained at home, and she was necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments
by Mrs. Bennet's being quite unable to sit alone.
Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but she could still moralize over every morning visit,
and as she was no longer mortified by comparisons between her sister's beauty and her own,
it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without much reluctance.
As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from the marriage of her sisters.
He bore with philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted
with whatever of his ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown to her,
and in spite of everything was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed on to make his fortune.
The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage
explained to her that, by his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished.
The letter was to this effect.
My dear Lizzie, I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do, my dear Wickham, you must be very happy.
It is a great comfort to have you so rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think of us.
I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much, and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help.
Any place would do, of about three or four hundred a year.
But, however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not. Yours, etc.
As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not, she endeavoured in her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind.
Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice of what might be called economy in her own private expenses, she frequently sent them.
It had always been evident to her that such an income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in their wants and heedless of the future,
must be very insufficient to their support, and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards discharging their bills.
Their manner of living, even when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the extreme.
They were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought.
His affection for her soon sunk into indifference. Hers lasted a little longer, and in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims of reputation which her marriage had given her.
Though Darcy could never receive him at Pemberley, yet, for Elizabeth's sake, he assisted him further in his profession.
Lydia was occasionally a visitor there when her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London or Bath, and with the Bingleys, they both of them frequently stayed so long that even Bingley's good humor was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone.
Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage, but as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropped all her resentment, was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth.
Pemberley was now Georgiana's home, and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth, though at first she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of talking to her brother.
He who had always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way. By Elizabeth's instructions, she began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with her husband, which her brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew, and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end.
But at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion, he was prevailed on to overlook the offence and seek a reconciliation, and after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, either to her affection for him or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted herself.
And she condescended to wait on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.
With the gardeners, they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them, and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.